Understanding the prototype.
We've said that JavaScript implements
something called prototypal inheritance.
That means that there exists this
concept called the prototype.
So what is that?
Well in this case, instead of a big
word alert, let's show you what we mean.
Let's say we have an object in memory,
we'll just call it obj.
We've already seen that objects
can have properties and methods.
This obj has a property.
Let's say it's property 1.
And I can access it with
obj.prop1 using the dot operator.
The dot operator goes out and looks for
a reference to something named prop1 and
goes, finds that memory and
gives it back to me.
As long as it's referenced against obj,
you've seen that already.
We also know that the JavaScript engine
adds hidden properties and methods to
things or properties and methods that we
normally don't interact with directly.
All objects In JavaScript,
and that includes functions.
All objects have a prototype property.
The property is simply a reference to
another object, we'll call it proto.
It's an object that stands on its own,
we could use it by itself if we wanted to.
But the object property that we'll
call proto, that's it's prototype.
That's the object that it's going to grab
and be able to get its properties and
methods as well So if this other object,
and it's just an object,
has some other property, say,
Prop 2, when I call obj.prop2,
the dot operator goes and looks for
Prop 2 referenced on obj itself.
And it doesn't find it, so
it next goes to the prototype.
There, that object proto and looks for
that property name there and
if it finds it, it returns it.
So it looks like prop two
is on our object, but
it's actually on our objects prototype.
Similarly that prototype object itself
can also point to another object and
so on and so forth.
Each object can have its own prototype,
and
maybe this prototype of the prototype
has another property, prop 3.
And so
I use the dot operator to call obj.prop3.
It doesn't find it in obj, so it looks
at the prototype, that proto object.
It doesn't find Prop 3 there, so
it looks at the prototype of that object,
and it finds Prop 3 and
returns it, gives it to us.
It looks like it's on our main object but
it's actually a ways down what's
called the prototype chain.
It looks like Like a chain, right?
Don't confuse that with the scope chain,
though it is kind of similar in some ways.
The scope change is about looking for
where we have access to a variable,
however this has to do with where
we have access to a property or
method amongst a sequence of objects
that are connected via this prototype
property, that we're calling here proto.
And it's hidden from me in the sense that
I don't have to go obj.proto.proto.prop3.
I can just say obj.prop3.
And the JavaScript engine does the work
of searching the prototype chain,
for those properties and methods.
The really interesting thing is if I
have another object, let's say obj2,
it can point to the same
object as its prototype
It's just another object,
these are just references.
So objects can share all the same
prototype if they want to, or
if you want them to.
And so if I call obj2.prop2,
interestingly that's going to
return the exact same property.
The same spot in memory as obj.prop2.
So they're literally sharing
a property but not directly.
Instead, via this concept within
the engine called the prototype chain.
Prop2 isn't on obj and obj2.
It's just that when the JavaScript
engine goes down the chain to search,
they happen to be pointing
at the same place.
Make sense?
This is the prototype chain,
the concept of prototypes.
And it's very simple, don't over-think it.
It's just I have this special reference
in my object that says where to look
for other properties and
methods, that's my prototype but
I don't have to manually go dot
prototype or something like that.
I can just go dot property or dot method
and the JavaScript engine will go look for
it down the chain.
All right, let's see some examples.
Let's say I have a person object.
[SOUND] And I'm going to give
this person object a firstname,
and I'm just gonna call it Default.
This is a generic person, [SOUND] and
the last name, also Default.
[SOUND] and
I'm going to give myself a property or
a method I should say called getFullName,
that uses the first name and
last name properties,
we've done this before.
All right, so there's my object person.
It has two properties and the method.
Now let's suppose I have
another object called john.
John has first name John and
a last name property Doe.
Now I'm going to do something
that you should never, ever do.
I know why.
Well, we're going to talk quite
extensively about the different ways to
build objects and set the prototype.
But, for demonstration purposes and
to explain this concept.
The best way to explain this
concept is to use a technique
that you really should never
use in real life because
modern browsers do provide a way
to directly access the prototype,
but you don't want to use it.
You don't want to set it,
because it's a performance problem,
it can slow down your
applications dramatically.
So, I'm just gonna put a comment here,
don't do this, EVER!
for demo purposes only!!!
Okay.
So.
So I'll take my john object,
and I'll set the prototype.
Again, don't ever do it this way.
But it'll make it very easy to
understand what's going on.
Remember that all objects have
a reference to another object and
we call that its prototype
where it goes and looks for
properties and methods if not
found on the original object.
So, in most modern browsers,
you can do this,
__proto__ I know, weird, right?
But that's to make sure you
never accidentally type it.
And you likely will never accidentally
type underscore underscore, proto,
underscore underscore.
Or accidentally name your own method or
property that.
It's really important to not mess this up.
So, even in the JavaScript language,
they made sure that that was hard.
So again, don't do this.
But we're going to set the prototype of
the John object to the person object,
and that's all we have to do.
John now inherits from person.
In other words, the JavaScript engine, if
I was to call a property or method, if I
was to try to access a property and method
on John, that doesn't exist on John.
It will go to person to try to find it.
And if it's not on person, whatever
person's dot proto is, it will go and
try to find it there and
on down the chain.
So now that John's
prototype points to person,
I can just console.log (john.getFullName).
Name.
I couldn't do that before,
there was no getFullName.
So, when I try to access getFullName,
it will see that it's not there,
and look at the proto, and then look for
it there and it will find it.
So, there it is, John Doe.
Notice something else important.
When this function is invoked, the
execution context when it creates the this
variable knows what object
originally we're talking about.
So this does not refer to person,
it refers to John,
whatever object originated the call.
Awfully useful, isn't it?
So now I've just basically given
access to this method of person.
Now if I console.log(john.firstname),
that property, I see John.
Let's think about that.
Why don't I get the fault?
Well because of the prototype chain.
I'm asking for the first name
property of the john object.
So it first looks at the john object for
that property and
if it finds it it returns it and stops.
It doesn't search the prototype
chain any further
once it finds what I'm looking for.
So this firstname hides the first
name on the prototype, make sense?
And that's only because the JavaScript
engine starts at the top of the chain and
works it's way down, and stops, the first
time it finds what it's looking for.
All right, let's try something else,
let's add a new object,
Jane, and
Jane will just have a first name.
No last name.
Just one name, like Beyonce or something.
Jane.
All right.
So we'll set,
remember don't ever do this, but
just to make it easy to
understand what's going on,
we'll set the Jane object's
prototype to the same person object.
So both of these protos, John's proto and
Jane's proto, are pointing
at the same spot in memory
where this person object lives.
So, I can console.log,(jane.getFullName).
All right,
now I want you to think about this.
What am I going to see?
The getFullName method returns
this.firstname + this.lastname.
And whenever we request a property,
it searches the prototype chain and
for starters this, what is the this
keyword is going to be pointing to?
It's going to be pointing at Jane.
So it's going to search for
first name and for
last name on the Jane object and
move down the prototype chain.
Jane only has a first name property.
So what will
the (jane.getFullName) return?
You have an answer?
Run it.
Jane Default.
Is that what you guessed?
Is that what you deduced?
You're right.
When it invokes get full name, the this
variable, the this keyword points to Jane.
Because that object originated the call.
And then it searches for
first name on "Jane", finds it,
and says okay, it's Jane.
And then it searches for lastname on
the Jane object, doesn't find it,
and looks at the prototype,
which is person, and finds lastname there.
So we get "Jane' 'Default'.
Makes sense?